[1] Most people connect fear with negative feelings, but it can actually be a very positive thing as well. Fear is natural and it is something we are all born with. We have always needed it to keep us safe from things that might be dangerous. If we face a dangerous situation, we can often find abilities and powers that we do not know we have. It is very interesting to see how our body helps us when we are scared.

[2] In the past, humans faced many dangers every day, so they learned to respond to them very quickly to stay alive. This natural reaction can also be seen in many different animals. Take cuttlefish, for example, which is an animal in the same family as a squid and an octopus. These creatures have an amazing ability to change their color and their shape. They use this ability to both fight and to escape. With the help of their bright colors, they can make other fish slower and easier to catch for food. Their color also helps them to hide in their environment from other predators. Another fish, the electric eel, uses its electric shock to catch its dinner and for self-defense, which is an action to protect itself from others. Humans do not have such unusual responses like changing color, but they do still have a "fight or flight" instinct. This is the body's natural way of keeping us safe by either facing the danger or getting away from it as quickly as possible.

[3] Our bodies react in a number of different ways when we are in a dangerous situation. For example, our reactions often become much faster, we become stronger, and we have much more energy. When we are under a lot of pressure, we often become nervous and some simple skills, such as putting a key in a door, can become much worse. However, our physical abilities, such as running and jumping, usually tend to improve. If an angry dog chases you in the street, you will probably run away from it much faster than usual. In a normal situation, we often only use about 65% of our strength, but studies have shown that this can increase to as much as 85% in more dangerous situations. 

[4] So how does our body create such a reaction? Fear is a natural reaction in the brain to an external stressful or dangerous situation. It is the body's internal way of trying to stay calm and safe. In the brain, hormones are released that cause our heart to beat faster and our breathing to become much quicker. This physical response is known as the "fight or flight" response and it makes it very difficult for a person to remain still and calm. Instead, your body wants you to run away or fight the situation that scared you.

[5] In biology, the brain causes the body to release over 30 different hormones. One of these is adrenaline, which is a chemical that gives you more energy when you are frightened, excited, or angry. These hormones cause many different reactions to help keep us safe. Some of our senses change, such as our eyes changing to let more light in so we can see better. Some of our body relaxes to let more air in. Other parts of the body become tense because of the adrenaline and glucose, which is a sugar produced in the body for energy. More blood is sent to our muscles and our organs, for example, the heart and other parts of the body that do specific jobs to keep us alive. We often feel cold and connect fear with being cold because our bodies are keeping our organs safe instead of keeping the skin warm. It is also why we feel very tired when we recover from a big shock. Fear is designed to protect us.

[6] Although we might not face as many physical dangers today as humans did in the past, fear still helps to keep us safe in our world. It stops us from doing stupid or dangerous things, like walking out into a busy road or not being careful on a high building. It limits the risks that we are willing to take. However, these limits may also take away some good opportunities in our lives. One common fear is a fear of failure. Many people are not willing to take risks because they are too scared of failing at something. This fear can lead to people not taking good chances in their careers or lives. The risk of making a mistake is reduced, but it also means people are less likely to try new things and may achieve less in the end. This desire to avoid failure can make people act differently than when they feel more confident.

[7] While fear may make people work more slowly and even limit their opportunities in life, it can also make us better at certain things. People who experience fear often are usually better at making decisions as they understand the risk more quickly. If people always only see the positive side of things, they may not pay attention to negative information they receive. As a result, this can make them poor decision makers in important situations.

[8] When we combine anxiety and fear with training, the results can be even more positive. If we are well-trained and prepared for a situation, we can react to stressful situations in a normal and calm way. Fear and adrenaline from the fight or flight instinct make you quick to respond to things while training means you know exactly what to do. This is why emergency professionals train for a wide range of situations and can remain calm when most of us would panic. Fear can be used to your advantage as long as you plan ahead and do your research. 
