[1] Most people connect fear with negative feelings, but it can actually be very positive as well. Fear is natural and something we are born with. We have always needed it to keep us safe from danger. If we face a dangerous situation, we can find abilities that we often do not know we have.

[2] In the past, humans faced danger every day so they learned to respond to it straight away to stay alive. This natural reaction can also be seen in many animals. Take cuttlefish, an animal in the same family as a squid and octopus. These creatures have an amazing ability to change color and shape. They use this to both fight and escape. With the help of their bright colors, they make other fish slower and easier to catch. Their color also helps them to hide in their environment. Another fish, the electric eel, uses its electric shock to catch food and for self-defense, as an action to protect itself from others. Humans might not have such unusual responses but they do still have a fight or flight instinct, which is the body's natural way of keeping us safe by either facing the danger or getting away from it as quickly as possible.

[3] Our bodies react in a number of different ways when we are in a dangerous situation. For example, our reactions often become faster, we become stronger and have more energy. Under pressure we become nervous and some simple skills such as putting a key in a door often become worse. However, physical abilities such as running and jumping tend to improve. If an angry dog chases you, you will probably run away from it faster. In a normal situation we often only use 65% of our strength, but studies have shown that this can increase to as much as 85% in more dangerous situations.

[4] So how does our body create such a reaction? Fear is a natural reaction in the brain to an external stressful or dangerous situation and is the body's internal way of trying to stay calm. Hormones are released that cause our heart to beat faster and our breathing to become quicker. This response is known as the fight or flight response and it makes it difficult to remain calm. Instead, you might run away or fight the situation that scared you.

[5] In biology, the brain causes the body to release over 30 different hormones, such as adrenaline, a chemical that gives you more energy when frightened, excited, or angry, to help keep us safe. These hormones cause a range of reactions. Some senses such as our eyes change to let more light in. Some of our body relaxes to let more air in. Other parts of the body become tense because of the adrenaline and glucose, a sugar produced in the body. More blood is sent to our muscles and organs, for example, the heart and other parts of the body that do specific jobs to keep us alive. We often feel cold and connect fear with being cold because our bodies are keeping us and our organs safe, instead of keeping us warm. It is also why we feel tired when we recover from a shock. Fear is designed to protect us.

[6] Although we might not face as many physical dangers today as we did in the past, fear still helps to keep us safe. It stops us from doing stupid things, like walking out into a busy road or not being careful on a high building. It limits the risks that we are willing to take. However, these limits may also take away some opportunities in our lives. One common fear is a fear of failure. Many people are not willing to take risks because they are too scared of failing. This fear can lead to people not taking good chances. The risk of making a mistake is minimized, but it also means people are less likely to try new things and may achieve less. This desire to avoid failure can make people act differently to when they feel more confident.

[7] While fear may make people work slowly, and even limit opportunities in life, it can also make us better at certain things. People who experience fear often are usually better at making decisions as they understand the risk more quickly. If people always only see the positives in things, they may not pay attention to negative information they receive. As a result, this can make them poor decision makers.

[8] When we combine anxiety and fear with training, the results can be even more positive. If we are well-trained and prepared, we can react to stressful situations in a normal and calm way. Fear and adrenaline from the fight or flight instinct make you quick to respond to things while training means you know what to do. This is why emergency professionals train for a wide range of situations and can remain calm when most of us would panic. Fear can be used to your advantage as long as you plan ahead and do your research.
